##***<u>Lesson 17: Interpreting Two-Way Tables</u>***

###**Objective**
You will calculate conditional, marginal, and joint frequencies and explain what they mean in the
context of the data.

###**Vocabulary**
marginal frequency, joint frequency, conditional relative frequency

###**Essential Concepts**

!!! note "Essential Concepts: "
    Marginal (relative) frequencies tell us about the distribution of a single variable.
    Conditional relative frequencies tell us about the distribution of one variable when "subsetting" the other.

###**Lesson**
1. **<u>Time Use Campaign Data Collection Responses:</u>**

    100. Today is the last day to collect data for the Time Use Campaign. You will be using the Campaigns Tool to view your survey responses. Click on the Campaigns tool on your IDS Homepage and sign in if prompted.

    100. Find the Time Use Campaign and click on responses.

        200. Click on the blue plus sign to expand the surveys you have submitted. <strong style="color: red;">For which days have you collected data?</strong>

        200. <strong style="color: red;">Do the total number of minutes for each day add up to approximately 1440?</strong> If you forgot to include an activity for one of the days, simply submit another survey making sure to select the correct day and include the activity.

        200. <strong style="color: red;">What patterns are you noticing?</strong>
        
2. In the previous lesson, you created 2 questions and a two-way table that would help you organize the data generated by your questions.

3. Your teacher will be creating a class survey in order for you and your classmates to collect the data for the questions you generated. You will come back to your frequency table at the end of the lesson.

4. Recall that in the previous lesson, you learned to calculate relative frequencies. Now it’s time
to look at other ways of understanding a two-way frequency table.

5. Here is the *Cat Ownership and Instruments* table:

    **Cat Ownership and Instruments**

    |  | **Plays an instrument** | **Does not play instrument** | **Total** |
    | ------------ | ------------- | ------------ | ------------ |
    | **Owns a cat** | 7 | 9 | 16 |
    | **No cats** | 10 | 9 | 19 |
    | **Total** | 17 | 18 | 35 |

6. Suppose that we want to know the following information:

    100. How many students own a cat? <span style="color:grey">***16***</span>

    100. What is the proportion of students who own a cat? <span style="color:grey">***16/35 ≈ 0.46***</span>

    100. What is the proportion of students who do not play an instrument? <span style="color:grey">***18/35 ≈ 0.51***</span>

7. Notice that the answers to the questions were located in the margins of the table and therefore are called **marginal frequencies**. Questions 6 a and 6 b are **marginal relative frequencies** since they are being expressed out of a total number of occurrences.

8. Now suppose that we want to know the following information:

    100. How many students own a cat and play an instrument? <span style="color:grey">***7***</span>

    100. What is the proportion of students that own a cat and play and instrument? <span style="color:grey">***7/35=0.2***</span>

    100. What is the proportion of students who do not own a cat and play an instrument? <span style="color:grey">***10/35 ≈
    0.286***</span>

9. Notice that the answers to the questions were located in the cells in the body of the table and therefore are called **joint frequencies**. Questions 8 a and 8 b are **joint relative frequencies** since they are being expressed out of a total number of occurrences.


10. Finally, suppose that we wanted to answer the question: Do a greater proportion of students in
Rosa’s art class who do not own cats prefer to play an instrument than those who do own cats?

11. In this case, the total for the “No cats” row
is important because we are only concerned with that subset of the group. Compare the values that show the **conditional relative frequency** for the row. More non-cat owners slightly prefer to play an instrument (0.53 vs 0.44).

    **Cat Ownership and Instruments**

    **Conditional Relative Frequencies by Row**
    
    |  | **Plays an instrument** | **Does not play instrument** | **Total** |
    | ------------ | ------------- | ------------ | ------------ |
    | **Owns a cat** | 7/16 ≈ 0.44 | 9/16 ≈ 0.56 | 16/16 ≈ 1.00 |
    | **No cats** | 10/19 ≈ 0.53 | 9/19 ≈ 0.47 | 19/19 ≈ 1.00 |
    | **Total** | 17/35 ≈ 0.49 | 18/35 ≈ 0.51 | 35/35 = 1.00 |

    **<u>Note:</u>** This is a conditional relative frequency by row. We can also calculate conditional relative
    frequencies by column if we were interested in knowing the difference in cat preference for those
    who play instruments versus those who don’t.

12. The **two way table** below shows which emotion males and females associate with the color red.

    **Gender and the Color Red**

    | |Love | Anger | Fear |Total |
    | ------------ | ------------- | ------------ | ------------ | ------------ |
    | Male| 7 | 11 | 5 | 23 |
    | Female| 12 | 15 | 10 | 37 |
    | Total| 19 | 26 | 15 | 60 |

13. <strong style="color: red;">Ask 4 questions about the data in the table above that must be answered by a:</strong>

    100. <strong style="color: red;">marginal frequency</strong>

    100. <strong style="color: red;">marginal relative frequency</strong>

    100. <strong style="color: red;">joint relative frequency</strong>

    100. <strong style="color: red;">conditional relative frequency (either by row or column)</strong>

###**Reflection**
<strong style="color: red;"> Write a paragraph summarizing the most important things you learned in the last 2 lessons. </strong>

###<p style="background: black; color: white; text-align: center;">**Homework & Next Day**</p>
Refer back to the two-way frequency tables you created in the prior lesson. Use the data that your teacher shared with you to fill in your two-way frequency table. Ask 4 questions about the data in your table that must be answered by a:

marginal frequency

marginal relative frequency

joint relative frequency

conditional relative frequency (either by row or column)

[<u>***Lab 1G: What’s the FREQ?***</u>](lab1g.md)

Complete [Lab 1G](lab1g.md) prior to the [Practicum](practicum2.md).